EU law traditionally is one of the core subjects for a qualifying law degree in England &
Wales. It filters through to the ‘domestic’ law of member states as well as some states that
have bilateral Treaties with the EU, such as Norway, which are bound to follow large
chunks of EU law. Any understanding of domestic law in a member state is incomplete
without a good grounding in the principles and content of EU law, which is the reasoning
behind EU law forming an integral part of domestic legal study.
The EU has forged closer ties between its member states and increased dramatically
in size since its formation in 1957. This was principally achieved through a series of
Treaties entered into between the various member states.
The Treaty of Lisbon led to a new Consolidated Treaty of the European Union, which
includes both the Treaty on the European Union (TEU), and the Treaty on the
Functioning of the European Union (TFEU). When referred to generically in this course
the expression Treaties is used. These are framework Treaties. They constitute part of
the EU’s primary legislation and provide a constitutional foundation for the EU. The
Treaties provide the vires for other primary legislation in the form of Regulations and
Directives. This is not to be confused with the Commission’s power to make secondary
legislation – these are also called regulations. They are akin to statutory instruments in
the UK constitutional set-up.
In the EU Treaties which provide the legal framework for the EU, it is referred to as the
‘internal market’ but colloquially it is often still referred to by lawyers and lay people
alike as the EU’s single market.
The relationship between the EEA, EFTA and EU member states is complex: The EU is a
member of the EEA. Each member state of the EU has membership of the EEA under that
auspice, but not in its own right. Therefore, if an EU member state leaves the EU it also
leaves the EEA. Also note there is an update, as since the extract was recorded Croatia
has joined the EU.
The architects of European integration had dreams whose roots lay in World War II and a
common desire to avoid future military conflict. It culminated in the Schuman Plan
advocated on 9 May 1950.
A feature of the move to European cooperation in the 1950s was that, although the
rhetoric of the founding fathers stressed the imperative for trust and commitment, some of
the member states involved lacked it. France remained cautious of Germany and was not
enthusiastic about extending cooperation too far. The UK was reluctant to participate
primarily because it remained distrustful of political cooperation with France. This stance
would see the UK remain outside the EU until it joined in 1973. Over the intervening years,
the union has expanded with successive accessions, each bringing a cluster of new
member states.
The preamble refers to the need for economic cooperation, to work towards economic
expansion, fair competition and international trade with a common commercial policy. It
also identifies social objectives as improved living and working conditions and the need to
ensure peace, liberty and create solidarity.
Subsequent Treaties gave special prominence to the task of creating a common market
and an economic and monetary union. They provided a constitutional basis for the
establishment of an internal market through the liberalisation of four basic factors of
production: the free movement of goods, workers, capital, services and establishments.
The current Treaties, the TEU and TFEU, retain the original economic aims but are now
bolstered by democratic and human rights elements which underpin them. They also give
the original aims an unambiguous constitutional base by taking parts out of the preamble
of the Treaty of Rome and placing them in Articles found in the body of the Treaties.
Significantly, the Treaties alter the prominence of some objectives and decrease others.
For example, Article 3 TEU offers its citizens areas of freedom, security and justice
without internal frontiers throughout the internal market over and above economic aims.